# Networking on resinOS 2.0

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Wifi Setup](#wifi-setup)
* [Setting a Static IP](#setting-a-static-ip)
* [Cellular Modem Setup](#cellular-modem-setup)
* [Network Requirements](#network-requirements)

## Introduction

In resinOS 2.0 the connectivity management has been change from [connman][connman-link] to [NetworkManager][networkmanager-link]. NetworkManager give the OS a bit more flexibility in the network setup and in conjunction with [ModemManager][modemmanager-link] allows resinOS to offer first class [GSM/Cellular support](#setup-a-cellular-connection).   

All of the network configuration for resinOS can be done though files in the boot partition of your device. I you have a freshly downloaded resinOS `.img` you can mount it and inspect the `resin-boot` or `resin-flash` (for devices that boot from eMMC) partition. In the boot partition you will find a directory called `system-connections`.

The `system-connections` directory consists of a set of "connection files" one file per connection. If you added a wifi connection at from the Dashboard when you downloaded your image, you should see two connection files `resin-wifi` and `resin-sample`. Both of these files are define a `wifi` connection type, but `resin-sample` is just a template or example file which you can copy to create new connections. You will notice that there is no file for ethernet, this is because NetworkManager will always set up a default ethernet connection. Most of the allowed options for these connection files can be found in the [NetworkManager settings reference][nm-setting-ref]

## Wifi Setup

If you entered your wifi SSID and passphrase when you downloaded resinOS from the dashboard you should have a file called `resin-wifi` in the image at `/resin-boot/system-connections/`.

```
[connection]
id=resin-wifi
type=wifi

[wifi]
hidden=true
mode=infrastructure
ssid=My Awesome Wifi Ssid

[ipv4]
method=auto

[ipv6]
addr-gen-mode=stable-privacy
method=auto

[wifi-security]
auth-alg=open
key-mgmt=wpa-psk
psk=super_secret_wifi_password
```

This file sets up a simple wifi connection to a network named `My Awesome Wifi Ssid` with a wifi password (`psk`) of `super_secret_wifi_password`. If you want to add multiple different wifi credentials, then simply make a copy of `resin-wifi` or `resin-sample` and change the `SSID` and `psk` key values. You can also add the `autoconnect-priority` key in each file to define the priority of each connection when the device has multiple wifi connections it can connect to.

The connection file also defines what kind of security the network expects, if you want to setup a network with a more elaborate security requirements, checkout the [NetworkManager settings reference page][nm-setting-ref].

As an example the below config sets up a WPA2-enterprise wifi connection:
```
[connection]
id=resin-wifi
type=wifi

[wifi]
ssid=PLACE_SSID_HERE
mode=infrastructure
security=802-11-wireless-security

[wifi-security]
key-mgmt=wpa-eap

[802-1x]
eap=peap
identity=PLACE_YOUR_ID_HERE
phase2-auth=mschapv2
password=PLACE_YOUR_PASSWORD_HERE

[ipv4]
method=auto

[ipv6]
method=auto
```

## Setting a Static IP

Setting a static IP is possible by adding a few fields to the `[ipv4]` section of your connection file.

```
[connection]
id=my-ethernet
type=ethernet
interface-name=eth0
permissions=
secondaries=

[ethernet]
mac-address-blacklist=

[ipv4]
address1=192.168.1.111/24,192.168.1.1
dns=8.8.8.8;8.8.4.4;
dns-search=
method=manual

[ipv6]
addr-gen-mode=stable-privacy
dns-search=
method=auto
```

The important bits to take note of here are `interface-name=eth0` which indicates which network interface to use and the `address1=192.168.1.111/24,192.168.1.1` line which shows we have a static IP of `192.168.1.111` and the network gateway is `192.168.1.1`. The final piece is to add the `dns=8.8.8.8;8.8.4.4;` line, which tell the device to use Google DNS. The set up for a wifi connection is very much the same, as can be seen in the below example.

```
[connection]
id=resin-wifi
type=wifi

[wifi]
hidden=true
mode=infrastructure
ssid=crystalcastle_2.4

[ipv4]
address1=192.168.1.127/24,192.168.1.1
dns=8.8.8.8;8.8.4.4;
dns-search=
method=manual

[ipv6]
addr-gen-mode=stable-privacy
method=auto

[wifi-security]
auth-alg=open
key-mgmt=wpa-psk
psk=glitterprince
```

## Cellular Modem Setup

For cellular or GSM based connections, resinOS makes use of [ModemManager][modemmanager-link] and is configured in much the same way as wifi connections are configured. Currently, it is only possible to add a cellular configuration by adding a connection file to `/resin-boot/system-connections` in the downloaded OS `.img` file, but in the future cellular connections will be configurable from the dashboard at download time.

To set up a cellular connection with your device, just drop the below example configuration into a file in the `/resin-boot/system-connections/` directory in the `.img` or on SD card (if you have it flashed with the OS already) and name it something like `cellular`. Replace the `apn=` and `number=` values with your mobile providers APN and PPP dialing number. If your mobile carrier requires a password and username, you will need to add those as well. For a more in depth look at available settings options for GSM, have a look at `Table 91. gsm setting` in the [NetworkManager settings reference][nm-setting-ref].

```
[connection]
id=Cellular
type=gsm
autoconnect=true

[gsm]
apn=general.t-mobile.uk
number=*99#
password=mms
username=User

[ipv4]
dns-search=
method=auto

[ipv6]
addr-gen-mode=stable-privacy
dns-search=
ip6-privacy=0
method=auto
```

### Known Tested Modems:

At the time of writing we have tested a number of GSM modems with resinOS 2.0, in general most of the modems listed in the [ModemManager Supported Devices list][modemmanager-supported-devices] should work out of the box with resin.io, but below is a list of ones that have been tested and known to work.

* Sierra Wireless MC8781 (USB AT command)
* Huawei E3531 (USB AT command)
* Huawei E1750 (USB AT command)
* ONDA MT191UP (USB AT command)
* Huawei E8231s-2 (USB Ethernet emulation)
* Huawei E3531i-2 (USB Ethernet emulation)
* Huawei E3131 (USB Ethernet emulation)
* [Fona 3G](https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-fona-3g-cellular-gps-breakout/overview) (USB AT command)
* uBlox lisa-u200 (USB AT command)
* Huawei ME909u-521
* Huawei E398-u1 (cdc-wdm0) --> This device took a while to connect, most likely because it had to run usb_modeswitch first to put it into modem mode.

With some of the modems listed in the [ModemManager Supported Devices list][modemmanager-supported-devices] you may find they struggle to connect, this is most likely due to [usb_modeswitch][usb_modeswitch-link] not knowing how to automatically switch the device to modem modem. In these cases you will need to have a look at your modem's data sheet and figure out how to force it to stay in modem mode.

## Network Requirements

In order for a resin.io device to get outside of the local network and connect to the resin.io API, there are a few core network requirements.

Resin.io makes use of the following ports:

* `443` TCP - This is the most fundamental requirement - it is used to connect to the VPN and the web terminal, and many web endpoints using TLS (https://.)
* `123` UDP - For NTP time synchronisation.
* `53` UDP - For DNS name resolution.

Each of these should work with outward only (and inward once outward connection established) firewall settings.

Additionally, if the network your device is connecting to works with whitelisting, you should whitelist the following domains on Port `80` and `443`:
* `*.resin.io`
* `*.pubnub.com`

Additionally make an outgoing connection to `mixpanel.com`, but this is not a functional requirement for resin.io, but rather allows us to track some useful metrics.

<!-- links -->

[nm-setting-ref]:https://developer.gnome.org/NetworkManager/stable/ref-settings.html
[connman-link]:https://01.org/connman
[networkmanager-link]:https://developer.gnome.org/NetworkManager/
[modemmanager-link]:https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/ModemManager/
[modemmanager-supported-devices]:https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/ModemManager/SupportedDevices/
[usb_modeswitch-link]:https://linux.die.net/man/1/usb_modeswitch
